todo list - draft-irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions

. Integrate comments received on mailing list (Juergen, Will, Jérôme...)

(done in -01). Integrate detailed review from Lisandro

(Laurent)
. Shorten introduction and more clear, logical flow. What do we want to say in the introduction, liaison between main points. Add relevant references.  a few nits to correct. And remove reference to research challenges (out of the ID in -01)

. Reorganize section on Acronyms, Terms and Definitions. Goal: proper Terminology and definitions. 	Parse the document to find main terms and concepts needing a proper definition.

. Add section on IBN definitions from other sources: ONF, ETSI... and related "work" (e.g. ZTN)
  Analyze, clarify and summarize  the relationship  of IBN with other technologies e.g. PBM, TMN...

. (new) Section on IBN Concepts and Principles
  Incl. Main goals. What problems the IBN vision is trying to address. (short Problem statement/contextualization)

. Rename section on "Lifecycle" to "Theory of Operation" (ToOps)
  Consolidate in single diagram. Check that the diagram is "complete" and good enough.

. New section on "Lifecycle"
  Intent states: declared (listed but no execution logic); defined (has execution logic); supported (can be executed); active (deployed to network/ under execution) + other states: on-hold? Decommissioned?
  Are states exclusive or could be cumulative (e.g. observed and active), some conditional…

(partly done in -01 by Alex). Provide more content on functionality section (merge 7 and 6)(partly done in -01 by Alex)
  Description of each ToOps/lifecycle steps. Extract proto-requirements? (towards ID on architecture?)

(done in -01). Provide content for Security Considerations (done in -01)
  Compromised intent generate detrimental effects at scale because automation 
  Provide means to contain impact and minimize surface attacks
  Safeguards in lifecycle to verify and roll back, report, rule out harmful intents
  IBN new technology for NM . Should run security analysis to identify potential new threats.
  Shall follow security BCP and implement standard  security measures
  IBN could be used as a security enabler: high level security and privacy rules. Maybe easier ways to detect threats and attacks (intent conflicts, harmful intents)

. (new) Introduce Manageability Considerations ?(for all NMRG IDs)
  Cf. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6123 and https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5706.html

(Alex)
(done) . Editorially align 6 and 7, specifically moving some of the material from 6 (lifecycle) into 7 (description of functions).

(done) . Adding discussion of security implications (done in -01).
